Integrate MIAF and WFM identity profile SUPs (#194)
margo/specification: system-design/specification/identity/svids.md

# SVIDs

A MIAF identity is represented by an **X.509-SVID**: an X.509 certificate that binds a SPIFFE ID to a key pair, with the SPIFFE ID in the certificate's URI SAN. This topic defines the SVID profile every MIAF principal presents, the cryptographic algorithms those credentials use, and how a verifier validates a presented SVID. It applies to every interface authenticated under a MIAF identity profile.

## X.509-SVID Profile

> MIAF adopts the [SPIFFE X.509-SVID specification](https://github.com/spiffe/spiffe/blob/main/standards/X509-SVID.md) by reference. X.509-SVID is the SVID representation used throughout MIAF.

Reviewer: Maybe would be good to mention if it pinned to a specific version. And how future versions are handled

Author: Good point, this is already covered [here](https://github.com/margo/specification/blob/f2d18176228b09744153020c1d5f5de858740536/system-design/specification/identity/identity-framework.md?plain=1#L101).

An identity profile MAY further constrain validity periods, key-protection rules, or path conventions for its own principal classes.

> The SPIFFE X.509-SVID specification defines the certificate profile and RFC 5280 path validation but leaves how the chain is conveyed out of scope, so MIAF specifies chain delivery here. When presenting an X.509-SVID, the presenter MUST include the leaf SVID and every intermediate CA certificate needed to build a path to a trust anchor; a certificate the Trust Bundle already carries as a trust anchor (typically the self-signed root) MAY be omitted. This presented chain travels inline wherever an X.509-SVID is conveyed, including the TLS `Certificate` message during mTLS. Because the [Trust Bundle](trust-bundle-and-discovery.md) holds only trust anchors, the presented chain is the sole carrier of the intermediates.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The SPIFFE X.509-SVID specification defines the certificate profile and RFC 5280 path validation but leaves how the chain is conveyed out of scope, so MIAF must specify chain delivery. When presenting an X.509-SVID, the presenter MUST include the leaf SVID and every intermediate CA certificate needed to build a path to a trust anchor; a certificate the Trust Bundle already carries as a trust anchor (typically the self-signed root) MAY be omitted. This presented chain travels inline wherever an X.509-SVID is conveyed, including the TLS `Certificate` message during mTLS. Because the [Trust Bundle](trust-bundle-and-discovery.md) holds only trust anchors, the presented chain is the sole carrier of the intermediates.
```

## Cryptographic Requirements

> This section constrains the signature algorithms and key parameters used for SVIDs, CSRs, and the keys that back them. The signatures below are those approved in [FIPS 186-5](https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/FIPS/NIST.FIPS.186-5.pdf), over the elliptic curves specified in [NIST SP 800-186](https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-186.pdf); RSA and ECDSA key lengths additionally meet the minimum strengths in [NIST SP 800-131A Rev 2](https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-131Ar2.pdf). The `ES256`-style codes in the table are [JWA](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7518) identifiers, used here as familiar shorthand; the certificate itself carries the equivalent PKIX signature-algorithm OID. Transport-layer cryptography is governed separately by the [TLS requirements](tls-requirements.md).

Reviewer 2: same link issue on this page

Author: See [here](https://github.com/margo/specification/pull/194#discussion_r3644293465).

| **ECDSA (P-256 or P-384)** | Keys MUST use curve P-256 (`prime256v1`) or P-384 (`secp384r1`); P-256 with SHA-256 (`ES256`) is the interoperable default, and P-384 with SHA-384 (`ES384`) MAY be used where a deployment requires a higher-assurance curve. |
| **EdDSA (Ed25519)** | Keys MUST use the Ed25519 curve; signatures follow [RFC 8032](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8032) (`EdDSA`). |
| **RSA (≥3072 + SHA-256)** | Modulus MUST be at least 3072 bits; signatures MUST use SHA-256. RSASSA-PSS (`PS256`, [RFC 8017](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8017)) is RECOMMENDED. RSASSA-PKCS#1 v1.5 (`RS256`) MAY be used only for X.509 certificate and CSR signatures (today the only RSA signatures in MIAF), for compatibility with issuing CAs that cannot produce PSS signatures (its use there remains sanctioned by [NIST SP 800-131A Rev 2](https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-131Ar2.pdf)). Any other RSA signature MIAF defines later MUST use PSS. |

- **ECDSA P-256 with SHA-256 is mandatory to implement.** Every MIAF component MUST implement it, for both presenting and validating SVIDs, so that any two components share at least one algorithm.

> - A component MAY additionally implement EdDSA (Ed25519), RSA, or both. A component that enables a non-mandatory algorithm for the SVID it presents is responsible for confirming that its peers accept it, since only ECDSA P-256 is guaranteed everywhere.

Reviewer 2: >A component that enables a non-mandatory algorithm for the SVID it presents is responsible for confirming that its peers accept it

How should this be done?

Author: There are two sides to this.

1. In TLS, the (mandatory) [`signature_algorithms` extension](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8446#section-4.2.3) provides the *mechanism* that allows the client and server to agree on the signature algorithms to use in a handshake. However, to be fair, in MIAF each principal holds a single SVID that is tied to a signature algorithm. So there is no real flexibility in the handshake. When a client or server implementation does not support the signature algorithm used by the other party, the TLS handshake fails.
2. In the end, it's the responsibility of the trust domain's operator to select, for issued SVIDs, an algorithm that is known to be supported across the trust domain. Margo can't help with that. If an operator wants to be safe, the MTI algorithm (ECDSA P-256 with SHA-256) is always a valid choice.

I'll update the spec to clarify that concern.

> - A component MAY additionally implement EdDSA (Ed25519), RSA, or both. Because a principal presents a single SVID bound to one signature algorithm, an SVID issued with a non-mandatory algorithm can be validated only by peers that implement that algorithm; a peer that does not will fail to validate it. Selecting an SVID signature algorithm that is supported across the Trust Domain is therefore the operator's responsibility at issuance (see [operator provisioning playbook](./identity-lifecycle.md#operator-provisioning-playbook)). ECDSA P-256 with SHA-256 is always a safe choice.

Reviewer: "Because a principal presents a single SVID bound to one signature algorithm" is technically imprecise. An SVID has:

- a subject public-key algorithm
- a CA certificate-signature algorithm

A MIAF profile could require the issuing CA to use the same algorithm family and parameters as the principal.

Author: Agreed, the wording was imprecise and could mislead people reading the spec. I have reworded that paragraph so that it now covers the signature algorithm of each certificate in the chain and the public-key algorithm of the leaf key.

> A MIAF profile could require the issuing CA to use the same algorithm family and parameters as the principal.

I'd rather not add this requirement. An enterprise root CA using RSA with leaf certificates using EC is a common enough pattern, so I'd be concerned to over-constrain here. We'll also need mixed chains for post quantum transition. The updated wording puts the responsibility on the operator. So if an operator wants to be on the safe side, they can always choose ECDSA P-256 with SHA-256 throughout the chain.

Reviewer: Maybe not the complete chain but at least the Issuing CA of the SVID?

Author: Mh, I'm not sure what that would buy us. Suppose we have an RSA root with an EC intermediate issuing EC leaf certificates. The verifier still needs RSA because the intermediate's certificate is signed with the root's RSA key. The set of algorithms the verifier must implement doesn't shrink. Meanwhile the constraint would tie the issuing CA's key to the leaf's algorithm family. So I'd leave this as operator guidance.
